# My Work

1. Blumenstock Response

  In "Don't forget people in the use of big data for development," by Joshua Blumenstock, three points are focused on. The article features a promise, some pitfalls, and possible ways forward when it comes to using big data as a tool to help out with development. First off, Blumenstock's promise provides a lovely picture of all the possibilities associated with using big data for future development. He raises ideas such as credit scores based off of Facebook accounts which will enable people to take out loans, using satellite maps to better locate areas of poverty and therefore focus relief efforts on those sections, and quickly identifying where natural disasters and epidemics are taking place. All of these sound wonderful and could greatly better the quality of life of many people. Those who could take out loans due to their new credit score would be able to purchase houses, cars, or other necessities. Less aid sent over to impoverished countries would be wasted on the rich because the locations that need it the most could be identified. Assistance could quickly reach places that have experienced natural disasters and people could be quarantined faster to prevent the spread of disease. With prospects such as these, what could be wrong with using big data? 
  
  As tempting as it may be to embrace the use of big data for development, it is important to investigate what could go wrong. When diving into the pitfalls of big data, the reality is not bright as it seems from the outside. To start off, Blumenstock mentions the fact that unitended consequences could result from the use of big data. For example, if Facebook is used to develop credit scores for individuals, they would instantly be able to take out loans through their phones, regardless of any prior knowledge on how loans work. This can lead to vicious cycles of debt where the quality of life of these individuals decreases because of missed payments and they subsequently lose their ability to take out a loan. Additionally, wholly relying on big data can lead to a lack of validation, where too much faith is placed on what the numbers are showing. An example of this is what happened when satellite images identified thatched roofs as idicating poverty. GiveDirectly, which is an organization that offers need to help those facing poverty, targeted homes that had thatched roofs to send aid to. Once people caught onto this, they started to build thatch roofed houses next to their iron roofed ones in order to receive a handout. Ultitmately, GiveDirectly's plan to focus on assisting those in need was thwarted since big data only showed information that appeared to be true without searching for any further proof. Another problem with big data is the way it can end up marginalizing groups that do not have the ability to gain access to technology. There are many people in the world who cannot purchase phones, so when studies are done based on the usage of phones, all of these people are effectively ignored in the numbers. Finally, one more major point that Blumenstock emphasizes is the lack of regulation of big data. A majority of the data collected is done by private companies and the government, which have a tendancy to be unregulated in developing countries. As a result, the information of the people living in developing countries is not protected and they face privacy violations.
  
  After being introduced to both the promises and pitfalls of big data, it is clear there is lots of potential for that kind of data despite the negative aspects involved. According to Blumenstock, the way forward is to validate the sources of information collected by comparing them with old collections of data, instead of simply replacing that old data, to customize the response to data based on the surrounding circumstances, and to deepen collaboration by fostering connections between data scientists, development experts, government, civil society, and the private sector, so the people on the map become more than just a number. No matter what big data says, no one acts according to a specific mold, which is why more sources than just numbers are necessary when moving forward into the future.
  
  Human development and data science are both tightly intertwined with each other in these times, but there is definitely a balancing act when it comes to managing the two. As mentioned above, there is so much potential for data science. With all the data available today, many have good intentions when it comes to utilizing that knowledge to better society. The issue is that people have a tendancy to manipulate data when its revelations effect their lives. Also, people can push to show data in different lights to promote whatever they are working on. The key to moving on with data science affecting human development is for more transparency. If the data is always layed out without any bias, and people live their lives according to their daily routines without any effort on their part to tamper with the data, then the possibility to obtain accurate information and make changes based on that increases exponentially. Additionally, all decisions that are based on big data need to be made with the reminder that each number is a human being. These people are affected by what data is collected and how it is used, so there should be several checks in place to ensure the accuarcy of that data and efforts should be made to understand the cultures and types of people being observed. Finally, the government and any corporations with access to big data should be crystal clear with how they plan to handle that data, because those numbers are pieces of peoples' lives and their privacy must be respected when it comes to the ethics of data science.
